A catalog is a curated collection of catalog records, each representing a registration of a dataset that is a part of the catalog. The catalog has a homepage, which is a URL of the entry web page to the catalog. The catalog also has an identifier, name and one or more languages in which it is available to its visitors. A dataset is a collection of data published or curated by a single agent. Data comes in many forms, including numbers, words, pixels, imagery, sound, and other multimedia, as well as potentially other types, any of which might be collected into a dataset. A dataset is described with its title, which is a name given to the dataset, and description, which is a free-text account of the dataset. Moreover, we need to know the date of the formal publication of the dataset and the date of the last modification of the dataset. The last modification date of the dataset indicates a change to the dataset content, not a change to the catalog record. An absent value of the last modification date may indicate that the dataset has never changed after its initial publication, that the date of the last modification is unknown, or that the dataset is continuously updated. The language of the dataset is also essential, which refers to the natural language used for textual metadata (i.e., titles, descriptions, etc) of the dataset. The agent responsible for publishing the dataset is the publisher of the dataset. Publishers are recognized by their names, but no more information is necessary about them. We also need to know the frequency at which the dataset is published, which means the rate at which the dataset-as-a-whole is updated. We use keywords and themes to characterize the dataset's content further. Keywords are freely defined without any restrictions. Themes must be from the predefined theme taxonomy associated with the catalog. Moreover, the spatial and temporal coverage of the dataset may be represented. Each dataset is available in one or more distributions. A distribution is a specific representation of the dataset. The dataset might be available in multiple distributions. These distributions always have the same data content, but they may differ in their natural language, media type or format, schematic organization, temporal and spatial resolution, level of detail, or profiles. A distribution is characterized by its title and description. The release date of the distribution is essential, denoting the publication date of that particular distribution, which can differ from the official dataset publication date. Information about a license should be provided for the distribution. A license is a legal document under which the distribution is made available. To enable data consumers to download a distribution, we provide the download URL of the distribution. The distribution is available in a given format, e.g., CSV file or RDF file, indicated by the distribution's format and media type. For a catalog record representing the registration of a dataset in the catalog, we need to have the registration date, record title, and description.