Colleges, as the highest element in the education system, are the ultimate centres of learning, independent knowledge and creative activity and play a key role in the scientific, cultural, social and economic development of society. Each college is a legal person. A public college is divided into faculties. A faculty implements at least one accredited study programme and carries out creative activities. A faculty implements accredited study programmes and lifelong learning programmes. The type of higher education activity is determined by the type of accredited study programmes implemented. The types of study programmes are bachelor, master and doctoral. A college is either a university or a non-university. A university college (or shortly a university) may carry out all types of study programmes and related scientific and research, development and innovation, artistic or other creative activities (hereinafter referred to as 'creative activities'). A non-university college may carry out bachelor's degree programmes and may also carry out master's degree programmes and related creative activities. A non-university college shall not be divided into faculties. The college is public, private or state-owned. A state-owned college is a military or police college. Other legal persons engaged in the educational and creative activities may also participate in such activities of a college.

Academic staff is a natural person who is a full professors, associate professors, extraordinary professors, assistant professors, assistant lecturers, lecturers and scientific, research and development staff who are employees of the college carrying out both teaching and creative activities in an employment relationship according to the agreed type of work. Academic staff are obliged to uphold the reputation of the college. Other professionals may also participate in teaching at the college on the basis of agreements on work performed outside the employment relationship.

A student is a natural person who is enrolled in a study program.

A college has its own academic community made up of its academic staff and students enrolled in its study programmes. The academic staff and students are members of the academic community.

A college is structured into its bodies. The self-governing academic bodies of a public college shall be
a) the academic senate,
b) the rector,
c) the scientific council,
d) the internal evaluation board, if established, and
e) the disciplinary committee.

The other bodies of a public college are the board of trustees and the bursar.

The academic senate of a public college is its self-governing representative academic body. It shall have at least eleven members, of whom at least one third and no more than one half shall be student members, and the rest shall be staff members. The members of the academic senate of a public college shall be elected from among the members of the academic community of the public college. Elections to the academic senate shall be direct, with a secret ballot. Membership of the academic senate of a public college is incompatible with the office of rector, vice-rector, bursar, dean, vice-dean, faculty secretary and director of the college. The term of office of individual members of the academic senate of a public college shall be for a maximum of three years.The academic senate shall have a chairperson, who shall be one of its academic staff members.

The rector is the head of the public college. It is a member of the academic community of the public college elected in rector's elections. The rector acts and decides on the affairs of the college, unless otherwise provided by law. In cases where a special regulation provides for the competence of the statutory body, the rector shall exercise it. The term of office of the rector shall be four years. The office of rector may be held by the same person at the same public college for a maximum of two consecutive terms.

The scientific council of a public college has its own members, one of whom is the rector, who is also the chairperson of the scientific council. The other members of the scientific council of the public college are prominent representatives of the fields in which the college carries out educational and creative activities. At least one third of the members shall be persons other than members of the academic community of the college.

The rector is the chairperson of the internal evaluation board. The vice-chairperson of the board shall be appointed by the rector from among the academic staff of the public college who are professors or associate professors of the college. The chairperson of the academic senate of a public college shall be a member of the internal evaluation board. The other members of the board shall be appointed by the rector, one third of whom shall be appointed on the proposal of the academic board and one third on the proposal of the academic senate, of whom one member shall always be appointed from among the students of the public college concerned.

The members of the disciplinary board of a public college are appointed by the rector from among the members of the academic community of the college. Half of the members of the disciplinary board of a public college shall be students. The disciplinary board of a public college shall elect its chairperson from among its members. The term of office of the members of the disciplinary board of a public college shall not exceed two years.

The board of trustees of a public college shall have at least nine members, the number of which must always be divisible by three. The members of the board of trustees of a public college shall be appointed by the minister in consultation with the rector, so that it includes adequate representation, in particular, of representatives of public life, professional chambers, employers' organisations or other persons or bodies carrying out, supporting or benefiting from the educational or creative activities of public colleges or their results, representatives of local and state government and alumni of the institution. Members of the board may not be employees of the college.

The bursar manages the management and internal administration of the public higher education institution and represents it to the extent determined by a measure of the rector.

A study programme is characterised by the name of the study programme and also by the type, and objectives of study in the study programme. In the case of a Bachelor's or Master's degree programme, it is also characterised by a description of the profile of the graduate of the study programme. The study programme must have a standard period of study with an average study load expressed in academic years. The degree awarded to graduates shall also be specified for the study programme. Subject of study shall be taught within the study programme. Their sequence in time within the study programme is determined by the curriculum of the study programme. The curriculum also determines the form of study. The forms of study may be:
a. full-time study;
b. combined study; or
c. distance learning study.

For the full-time form of study, the curriculum is created within the framework of a programme of study in such a way that the largest part of instruction takes the form of lectures, tutorials, seminars, courses, practical training, laboratory classes, consultation, and other similar forms of instruction, which are held according to a regular schedule, which will be usually a weekly schedule; they enable students to acquire knowledge directly.

For the combined form of study, the curriculum is created within the programme of study based on the assumption that study takes a form which employs the principles of both full-time and distance learning study.

For the distance learning form of study, the curriculum is created within the framework of the programme of study based on the assumption that study is offered in the distance form of instruction, and that teachers usually perform the role of consultant.

For study programmes carried out by a faculty, the faculty appoints and dismisses a study programme guarantor from among its academic staff according to the rules laid down in the internal regulations of the college. The guarantor may only be an academic staff who meets the conditions laid down in the standards for accreditation of the study programme for the proper performance of activities. Only an associate professor, a full professor or an extraordinary professor who is an academic staff member of the college concerned may be the guarantor of a master's degree programme and a doctoral degree programme. The degree programme guarantor shall, in particular, coordinate the content of the degree programme, supervise the quality of its implementation, evaluate the degree programme and develop it.

A study programme belongs to only one field of education if the state examinations or the dissertation defence verify profiling knowledge or skills in the basic subject areas belonging to one field of education. A study programme is a combined programme of study that belongs to more fields of education if the state examinations or, where appropriate, the dissertation defence test profiling knowledge or skills in the core subject areas belonging to more than one field of education. A field of education is a defined section of higher education within which study programmes of close or related content are prepared, approved and implemented, reflecting a common theoretical and methodological basis of the given field of education. There are the following areas of education: Architecture and Urban Planning, Security, Biology, Ecology and Environment, Transport, Economics, Electrical Engineering, Energy, Pharmacy, Philosophy, Religious Studies and Theology, Physics, Historical Sciences, Chemistry, Computer Science, Cybernetics, Forestry and Wood Science, Mathematics, Media and Communication Studies, Non-teaching Pedagogy, Political Science, Food Science, Law, Psychology, Social Work, Sociology, Civil Engineering, Engineering, Technology and Materials, Physical Education and Sport; Kinanthropology, Mining and Mineral Processing, Teaching, Arts, Arts and Cultural Sciences, Earth Sciences, Veterinary Medicine, Veterinary Hygiene, General Medicine and Dentistry.

The Bachelor's degree study programme is aimed at preparing students for the profession and for study in a Master's degree programme. The standard period of study, including work experience, is a minimum of three and a maximum of four years. The studies of a student in the Bachelor's degree study programme is duly completed by a state final examination, which usually includes the defense of the bachelor's thesis. Graduates of bachelor's degree programmes are awarded the academic degree of 'Bachelor' (abbreviated as 'B.Sc.' before their name) and, in the field of arts, the academic degree of 'Bachelor of Arts' (abbreviated as 'B.A.' before their name).

The Master's degree study programme is aimed at acquiring theoretical and practical knowledge based on the current state of scientific knowledge, research and development, at mastering their application and at developing skills for creative activity; in the field of art, it is focused on demanding artistic training and the development of talent. The Master's degree programme is a follow-up to the Bachelor's degree programme; the standard duration of this programme is at least one and not more than three years. 
The studies of a student in the Master's degree study programme are duly completed by a state final examination, which includes the defence of the diploma thesis. The following academic degrees are awarded to graduates of master's degree programmes:
(a) in the fields of economics, technical sciences and technology, agriculture, forestry and military science, 'engineer' (abbreviated 'Ing.' before the name),
(b) in the field of architecture, 'engineer architect' (abbreviated 'Ing. arch.' before the name),
(c) in general medicine, 'Doctor of Medicine' (abbreviated 'M.D.' before the name),
(d) in the field of dentistry, 'Doctor of Dental Medicine' (abbreviated MDDr. before the name),
(e) in the field of veterinary medicine and veterinary hygiene, 'Doctor of Veterinary Medicine' (abbreviated 'MVDr.' before the name),
(f) in the arts, 'Master of Arts' (abbreviated 'MgA.' before the name),
(g) in other fields, 'Master' (abbreviated 'Mgr.' before the name).

The doctoral study programme focuses on scientific research and independent creative activity in the field of research or development or on independent theoretical and creative activity in the field of art. The standard period of study shall be at least three and not more than four years.

The studies of a student in the doctoral programme is carried out according to an individual study plan under the guidance of a supervisor. A supervisor is an academic staff who is a scientific expert in the field.

The studies shall be duly completed by a state doctoral examination and a public defense of the dissertation. The dissertation must contain original and published results or results accepted for publication and it shall demonstrate the ability and readiness for independent research or development activities or independent theoretical and creative artistic activity. Graduates of doctoral programmes shall be awarded the academic degree of 'doctor' (abbreviated 'Ph.D.' after their name). Studies in a doctoral programme shall be monitored and evaluated by a subject board established in accordance with the internal regulations of the public college thereof which has accredited the relevant study programme.

The subject is taught in particular in the form of lecture, tutorial, seminar, proseminar, course, practical training, internship, special course, laboratory class, field trip, fieldwork, individual work, or consultation. Depending on its character, the subject may be implemented in a full-time, distance learning, or combined form. A subject may take one or two semesters in the same academic year. Each subject has an identification code which is unique within the college. A subject is determined by the identification code, the number of semesters of instruction under sentence one, the number of assigned credits, the form of teaching, and the form of assessment of study.

A subject can be a part of the curricula of one or more programmes of study. In that case, it must not be assigned different numbers of credits. Curricula, with the exception of doctoral study, stipulate which subjects are compulsory or elective for students; other subjects taught at the college are regarded as optional subjects for the relevant curriculum. Elective subjects are classified into one or more groups of elective subjects in the curricula.

The faculty offers the subject may state that for a given subject stipulated as compulsory or elective:
a) the registration for a given subject has as a prerequisite the completion of another subject or subjects, or simultaneous registration for another subject or subjects;
b) the completion of a given subject has as a prerequisite the completion of another subject or subjects;
c) the registration for a given subject is excluded by the simultaneous registration for another subject;
d) the completion of a given subject is excluded by the previous completion of another subject;
e) the registration for a given subject is excluded by the previous completion of another subject; or
f) the completion of a subject is considered as the completion of another subject or subjects.

A student registers to the subjects that are compulsory and elective in the curriculum of the study program he or she is enrolled in. The student can also register any other subject. Assessment of completion of the study of a subject means the verification of completion of the subject by the student. The forms of this assessment are:
a) colloquium;
b) course credit;
c) graded course credit;
d) course test;
e) examination; or
f) a combination of the forms under letters (a) to (e).

The assessment of study of a subject registered in a given unit of study may not be carried out later than by the end of the examination period of the summer semester of the academic year in which the student studied in the given unit of study.

The assessment of the study is carried out by an examiner, who is always an academic member of staff. The examiner must grade and publish the results of the written forms of study assessment without delay, and no later than within two weeks of the date when the written form of assessment was taken. The time limit may be shortened by an internal regulation of the faculty. The faculty stores the written forms of assessment of study of the subject at least until the end of the following academic year.

The colloquium, course credit, or course test may represent an independent assessment of the subject, or may represent a prerequisite for taking an examination in the given subject.

The results of colloquium, course credit, and course test are graded as "pass"-"fail" or "credited"-"not credited". Successful completion of these assessments of study of the subject means the classification "pass" or "credited". The results of examination and graded course credit are graded as "excellent", "very good", "good", and "fail". Successful completion of these assessments of study of the subject means the classification "excellent", "very good", and "good".

An examination tests the student’s knowledge or his ability; the basic requirements for the examination are in accordance with the curriculum provided in the description of the subject and published in electronic form. The forms of examination are oral, written, practical, or combined. Oral examinations and the oral component of combined examinations are open to members of the academic community of the college; for reasons of capacity, the presence of the members of the academic community may be limited.

In contrast to course credit, a graded course credit denotes, in the same way as an examination, how well the student fulfilled the requirements for being granted the credit.

If justified or purposeful, it is possible to perform the assessment of study of a subject remotely, either in part or in full, using information and communication technologies, providing that it is possible to verify the identity of the student and to ensure compliance with the rules set for the given assessment of study of the subject.